Well I was very pleased when everything checked
out and got in the maneuvering unit. It checked out
and I was able to go ahead and start flying it
around. Was it fun? Yeah it was fun. Your newspaper
article said that you had a great deal of fun with it
and that your wife Bernadette said that you didn't
want to come in again. Well it flew very much like
the simulator so that I was able to relax and enjoy
flying the thing. It was a pleasure to be in an
environment where there were no artificial
limits to the number of degrees of roll, pitch, or
yaw you could go through. You didn't have to worry
about encumbering cables or umbilicals or things
of that sort. Basically, it was just a matter of
getting on with the planned profile out the system
and making sure that indeed it flew as it appeared
to. When was the project for the MMU first brought
to your attention? Well, actually, the
Air Force built a maneuvering unit known as the
Astronaut Maneuvering Unit, which was carried on
Gemini 9, which flew in June of 1967. if I recall
correctly. And one of the, or the fatal, if I can
call it that, problem there was that the
pressure-shoot technology was in such an infant
state that Gene Cernan, who was to fly it, became
exhausted and overheated and things of that sort
before he could do so. There were some problems
with that unit as well, but it had been scheduled to
fly again on Gemini 12 and was taken off because our
confidence in EVA technology was on sort of a
roller coaster cycle. That is, Gemini 9 had
problems. 10 went well. 11 had problems. They
figured that they would finish up the Gemini
program on a positive note. So they made the
spacewalk on Gemini 12 a very simple one. So
maneuvering units were in low regard, I guess you
could say. at that time. An Air Force captain by the
name of Ed Whitsitt had an idea for an experiment
inside the Skylab workshop, which was then being
talked about as Apollo Applications AAP. And I got
together with him. And over the course of a few
years, we put together an experiment, which came
to be known as M509, or the Astronaut Maneuvering
Research Vehicle, which was an experimental
maneuvering unit. that was in fact carried inside
the Skylab workshop and flown inside the workshop
in a pressurized environment so that you got the
zero-gravity maneuvering dynamics, but it
didn't have to be qualified for vacuum or for the
thermal extremes of space or for the reliability.
Five Skylab crewmen flew it for a total of about 14
flying hours, and we took the data from that
experiment and the in-flight films and TV footage
and used them to sell the MMU for the shuttle
program. So I guess you could say the whole thing
stretched from about the fall of 1967 on up to the
spring of 1984.
The MMU is viewed as a technological breakthrough
in space travel. Are there plans underway for a
larger space vehicle based on the same propulsion
system? Well, we'd like to roughly double the
propellant supply in the MMU to shift it over to a
microprocessor-based control system.
Those are about the only things that we see on the
immediate horizon. Now, there have been some
concepts around for a number of years for
something they call a personnel transporter,
which would be the orbital analog of a motor
scooter. You could climb aboard the thing, and it
would probably look a lot like a stand-up motor
scooter, but with a larger platform out behind it,
so you could carry two and maybe three There's
also been a proposal known as the Man Remote
Workstation, which is a little enclosed capsule
with manipulator arms sticking out the front of
propulsion jets and things like that on it. very
similar to the
little capsule in 2001 in Space Odyssey. But
again, that hasn't gotten beyond the artist
concept stage. But one of the things that's being
done with the space station program is to put about
10% of our development funding, at least
initially, into looking at automation and
robotics and what that could do for the system, it
may be that something like this would fall out of
it.
How
did you go about testing it in preparation for the
flight, and did you use a simulator as you earlier
said, and how fast were you traveling when you were
using MMU in space? Okay, let's take the questions
one at a time. Okay. As far as the speed in space,
both I And the orbiter were moving along at about
17,000 miles an hour, which is the orbital
velocity at our altitude of about 150 nautical
miles. The relative speed between myself and the
MMU and the orbiter was never more than about 1.5 to
2 feet per second. The idea is basically you're
maneuvering with respect to the orbiter much as
you fly formation between two airplanes. Small,
deliberate movements or control inputs, and you
wait for the effect of these velocity changes to
take effect. And then you put in another one, and
you wait for it to take effect. So I was actually
moving rather slowly with respect to the orbiter
and fast with respect to the Earth. As far as
simulating and testing the MMU goes, a lot of our
development work, both for the M509 unit in Skylab
and for the MMU and training, was done on a large six
degree of freedom moving base simulator at the
Martin Marietta Aerospace Company outside of
Denver. This device has a track and a large room,
about 60 feet long, And a carriage can move up and
down this track. And then on top of the carriage,
which is about 17 feet wide, is another set of
tracks, which enable a tower that's about 15 or 20
feet tall to move back and forth. So you can move
anywhere in the room. And then on this tower,
projecting out from the side of it, able to move up
and down, is a gimbal head that can be driven in
roll, pitch, and yaw. have a machine that's
man-rated so you can put people in it and build a
portion of the MMU crew station that controls and
displays into this so you can climb in and by
inputting the electrical signals from the hand
controllers to a computer and running that into a
servo system you can cause the thing to behave as
though it were in a weightless environment and in
fact as though the laws of orbital mechanics were
being obeyed and things of that sort so that we get a
very realistic simulation. We also designed it so
that you can input intentional malfunctions
modeled after the system failure modes so that you
can cause a thruster to appear to stick on or a
battery to fail and things of that sort and require
the pilot to take the appropriate corrective
action to recover from it and keep flying. By way of
explanation, the MMU for orbiter applications
was designed to be totally redundant. That is, we
had 24 little compressed nitrogen thrusters
split into two systems of 12 each, either one of
which was adequate for flying around and
controlling the shell. So while we normally used
combination of 24 it's sort of like having an
orchestra where you can split the thing in half if
you do it right and still still play music each
system had its own battery and its own propellant
tank and its own control logic and its own set of
switches and the hand controls
so most of the malfunction recovery consisted of
identifying the system in which the failure had
occurred and shutting the bad system off and
continuing with what was left By way of testing,
before I get off the training aspect, one of the
other things that we do is use a weightless
simulation derived from a water tank where you get
in a pressure suit and there's a certain amount of
air trapped inside it because you pressurized it
three and a half or four pounds per square inch over
the water pressure. And this makes you buoyant. So
you add lead weights until you are neutrally
buoyant or displacing as much water as you weigh.
And then you can maneuver slowly, hand over hand,
and take different attitudes as though you were
weightless. So we built an MMU that was ballasted
out to be neutrally buoyant as well, and we have a
mock-up of the orbiter cargo bay in our water tank,
and we developed
flight support station, which is the thing that
holds the MMU and the orbiter, and also the
procedures for getting into it and getting out of
it and getting it out of the flight support station
and back in at the end of the mission so you could
bring it home using the water tank. And this was a
lot of effort put into that since one of the
problems back in the Gemini program had been the
difficulty of getting into the astronaut
maneuvering unit And that contributed to Gene
Surin's problems with overheating and fatigue.
The fact that that worked very well on orbit also
indicates that we did the job right. Testing took a
number of different forms. We, of course, tested
each of the components at the component level,
pressure regulators, electronics, control
units, things of that sort. And additionally, the
MMU and the flight support station subjected to
extreme cold and extreme high temperature runs in
vacuum to verify that none of the components were
going to fail at high temperatures or that you
wouldn't have lubricants that congeal at low
temperatures or differential thermal expansion
and contraction of metallic parts that would bind
up. And in fact, we came up with a few little
problems each time which were corrected. Then
shortly before the mission, that is about Last
October, we had two manned thermal vacuum chamber
runs down here at the Johnson Space Center where I
ran one of them, and I think Pinky Nelson ran the
other one. And we got in pressure suits into this
large vacuum chamber about 30 feet in diameter and
maybe 50 feet high. which was pumped down to
probably something less than 10 to the minus 5 or 10
to the minus 6 torr, and had walls cooled with
liquid nitrogen and a solar simulator being a bank
of arc lights so that we could subject the MNU to
these streams of temperature as well in there. And
then we went in and manually operated them and
fired the thrusters and cycled everything to
verify that it worked. And in fact, in that
context, we also came up with an electrical
problem in the MNUs that, had it not been
corrected, had the potential of making them
inoperable in orbit. And that was fixed. And it
looks like we finally got all of the bugs out of the
thing before the mission, which was what we had set
out to do. At the same time, let me mention that the
folks at Martin, the contractor, built in and who
were particularly anxious as well to have a
successful mission because they felt like a lot of
their corporate pride was resting on it. And they
really bent over backwards and did everything
that they could to make it work. And they did. It
worked very well.
Astronaut Alan Bean said in an interview done by an
A&M student that his family and marriage were
severely impacted by his career. Do you think your
family has been impacted by your career? And in so
what way? Well, we came to Texas quite a while ago,
and we seem to have survived coming to Texas. I
don't think it has really been impacted. I've put a
lot of work into the program, but seems happy
around here. She has horses. Bruce and Tracy have
grown up here locally and gone to UT. And, in fact,
Bruce just finished a year at the University of
Reading in England, got back toward the end of the
summer. So I think we're working on it very well.
Good, good. You are the newest McCandless to make
significant US history, with your father and both
grandfathers being outstanding naval men. How do
you feel about carrying on this legacy, and does
your son continue want to continue in his
tradition? Well, Bruce is interested,
apparently, in the Foreign Service or perhaps the
law career, as opposed to a naval career, and
that's certainly his option. I would be the last
person to try to force him into something like
that. One of my memories from the Naval Academy was
how unhappy those individuals were that had been
forced into the Naval Academy because Daddy was an
admiral and such and such, or Daddy wanted to do
this, that, or the other. So it's been strictly his
call. I'm very pleased to have been carrying on the
Naval tradition, although in all candor, what I
have been doing down here at NASA for the last
several years is really fairly far removed
driving the ship around on the surface of the ocean
or flying an airplane off a carrier. It is a
different sort of an ocean, if I can use that
analogy. And of course, it's also one that the Navy
is currently very interested in. With all of the
land spaceflight programs, and most
particularly the space shuttle program, we've
had Earth observations.
Let me call it an experiment or an experimental
program, basically. It started out back in the
Gemini program with the guys taking pictures out
the window and saying, gee whiz, look at that, and
has evolved from there to the point where each
shuttle flight has a number of cameras on board and
we try to take observations of significant
oceanographic and land-based phenomena. I'm not
talking about pictures of or things like that,
because we don't get that detail. But we're
looking at volcanic activity, land use patterns,
ocean currents, eddies, swirls, waves, and
things of that sort. And the Navy has been so
interested in that that on the last flight, in
fact, we had a civilian naval oceanographer, Paul
Skelly Powers, who was sponsored by the
oceanographer of the Navy aboard the shuttle
flight, to go up there personally and make some
observations and take pictures. So the Navy is
very interested. They're also interested in how
the Navy can use the space station if, in fact, the
space station comes to pass. I put it that way
because the official position of the Defense
Department is that they aren't interested
because they don't have any money they want to put
into it. But if the space station is going to be up
there, the Navy, at least, would like to be there
using it to observe the oceans and gather data
along those lines.
Has the selection process for NASA astronauts
changed since you were first selected? And if
there is a change, is it due to the inclusion of
women? Well, no, the selection process has
changed.
First off, we have gotten away from the concept
that everybody has to be a pilot. When I came in, I
came in as a pilot astronaut, of course, but at the
same time, the scientist astronauts that were in
the group before and the group after me all went
through a flight training to become pilots. The
current mission specialist selectees need not be
pilots, and if they aren't pilots, why they don't
get trained as pilots? The criteria for selecting
pilot astronauts is still about the same as when I
came in, maybe a little bit more relaxed since we
need more people. But as far as physical
qualifications go, in the early days, there was
this tremendous emphasis on picking the few
individuals that could withstand the physical
rigors of space flight and things of that sort.
When the shuttle was designed, it was
intentionally built so that the vast majority of
people that were walking around under their own
power would be physically qualified. So we've
been able to greatly relieve the physical
qualifications. In the mission specialist
arena, we're still looking for people with
advanced degrees in engineering, science, or
medical degrees, reasonable physical health,
and that are interested in space careers. That's a
lot less stringent than some of the previous
criteria.
interesting shift is that the first group of
scientists astronauts that were selected in 1965
were selected based on their already existing
preeminence in scientific fields the trend in
recent years seems to be to pick people who have the
educational background but who are just out of
school or perhaps in their late 20s and have a lot of
potential but haven't necessarily and gotten
themselves all wrapped up in various scientific
institutions. And of course, it's been broadened
to include women.
And with the payload specialists, NASA doesn't
really have any criteria that I am aware of for the
payload specialists, other than the fact that
they be sponsored by their government or company.
and that we get the right of refusal if they appear
to be unsuited for space flight.
How do you view NASA's future, and are there any new
plans underway for exploration to other planets,
or maybe a Mars mission as you mentioned earlier?
Well, NASA first is a research and development
agency.
The agency has surprised itself, I think would be a
fair statement, by finding that having built the
space shuttle, it's now obligated to operate it,
as opposed to just building one and saying, gee, it
worked. So there's a little bit of transition and
progress there in learning to operate it, and to
operate it economically and reliably, by
reliably I mean on a timetable or schedule. I
wouldn't be at all surprised to see in a few years
that the whole shuttle program is spun off into
some sort of governmental, quasi-governmental
corporation, somewhat like the ComSat
Corporation operates, or potentially even
bought out completely by some sort of team
composed of aerospace industry and airline
transport. There have been a number of nibbles
along those lines, but nobody has yet come up with
all the money required. There was also a
realization that the space shuttle, although
it's neat right now, is not the ultimate space
vehicle. And if you look at ships and airplanes, it
was opined that a 25-year lifetime was probably a
reasonable lifetime for the space shuttle
vehicle as a technologically viable entity. And
this meant that about the year 2005, there better
be something else getting ready to fly, or we'd be
in the dinosaur age, so to speak. And aerospace
projects seem to take about seven, eight, 10 years
to go from inception to completion. So between now
and 95 appeared to be a sort of a window that
something could be done in the meantime, or in
which something could be done. And this was one of
the reasons advanced for doing the space station
now is to build a space station in this window
before starting to work on a shuttle replacement.
At the same time, though, there is a considerable
movement building strength to develop a lunar
base in the early 2000s or the early 20s. perhaps
followed by a Mars mission or something of that
sort. But all you can say right now is that there was
last week a meeting in Washington that was
attended by a lot of former astronauts and a lot
of space technology figures, some science
fiction writers, and the current NASA
administrator, Mr. Webb, and people like that. I
said Webb, I meant Beggs. They were both Jim, Jim
Webb and Jim Beggs. The current NASA
administrator, Jim Beggs, and he supported a
future Mars lunar mission. But I've got to point
out to you that right now there is no money in the
budget for anything like that. The only planetary
mission that NASA has right now, budgeted, is the
Galileo probe to Jupiter, which was scheduled to
be launched in 86 from the shuttle, I believe. And
presumably, it would get to Jupiter about three
years later, put a probe down through the
atmosphere, unmanned, of course, to see if there
is a surface or see what's below the atmosphere.
So I think eventually, there probably will be some
sort of return to the moon or go for Mars, and of
course this Jerry Neal space colony thing is a
potential way of doing it, but right now it's still
quite a ways in the future. The famous words of Neil
Armstrong as he first walked on the moon have
become a household phrase. If you had the chance to
give a phrase to history, what would it be? Well, I
took Neil's words and paraphrased them. I was the
Capcom during Apollo 11 when Neil came back with
his words, after having assured me pre-launch
that he had nothing prepared and no words in mind,
and he was just going to say something like, oh
heck, here we are. You were the voice at the Apollo
mission, weren't you, from that, from Houston?
Right. Yes, I remember that. So I just put these
words on the MMU plate, twisted them around a
little bit. I'm not really in the business of
leaving phrases for history. Have you really
enjoyed your career? Has it been something that
you've never regretted and known is the way you'd
like to go? Oh, this is a thing that's interested me
since,
oh, probably the early 40s. My grandfather,
Bradley,
discouraged me at the time after I had gotten a book
on space travel, saying that, yeah, it probably
happened, but not in this century, and I should
concentrate on more worthwhile things like
command of a battleship or an aircraft carrier or
something like that. And, of course, things just
came along a lot more rapidly. The space program
has always been very interesting down here.
There's never a dull moment. So I don't regret any
of it. Your sisters, Rosemary and Sue, both did an
interview that you grew up looking at the moon. And
Rosemary even went so far as to say that she was sure
that she had danced on the rooftops one Christmas
to convince her that there were reindeer there.
No, they just said that you have been very
interested in space since you were very young. I
have been interested in space, but I've also been
interested in science and technology in general.
Electronics, finance, chemistry, things of that
sort. Well, that's about all I have. Okay, well. I
appreciate it. Thank you. I do want to ask you... I
think Bruce has some tuna sandwiches or
something. Ask the question, hey, are all birth
defects inherited? Or is it a possibility that in
utero, certain things in the environment will
cause birth defects? Well, what we have to look at
is a combination of events that transpire. Yes,
there are selected types of birth defects that are
hereditary. And then there are those that are
classed as non-hereditary. And so that's what we
want to kind of gear to now and focus on are some of
the aspects of birth defect. If you will now,
please use the fast forward switch, run this tape
out, and go to tape two, and we will look at some of
those aspects of birth defects. Please do that
now.